Now, let us look at shortest paths in graphs
where we allow Negative Edge weights. In particular
let us look at the Bellman-Ford Algorithm.
So, recall that the correctness for Dijsktra's
algorithm relied on an invariant property
that every vertex that we burn automatically
has the shortest path computed at the time
when we burn it.
However, as we saw this argument does not
work if we can have negative edge weights,
because we may find later a path via vertex
which we have not burnt yet which becomes
a shorter path to a vertex we have burnt earlier.
We also said that allowing negative edge weights
is one thing, but allowing negative cycles
is not a good idea. Because, once you have
a negative cycle, you can go round and around
cycle as many times as you want, it arbitrarily
reduces the length of the path, so the shortest
path is not even a well defined quantity.
So, long as we have negative edges, but not
negative cycles, shortest paths do exits and
we can hope to compute them.
So, let us first look at two basic properties
about shortest paths which hold regardless
of whether the edges can be negative or not,
provided we do not have negative cycles. So,
the first property is fairly obvious, that
is a shortest path will never go through a
loop. So, supposing I want to go from s to
t and suppose along the way I actually go
through the same vertex twice and then I continue.
Now, what we know is that this is a loop and
since it is a loop, the weight is greater
than or equal to 0, it cannot be negative,
because we have ruled out negative loops.
So, therefore, if I take this path and I just
cutout this loop, then I have a direct path
from s to t. And if I look at the cost of
direct path from s to t, it cannot be any
bigger than this one, because at best this
loop has 0 and decrease nothing but, in the
general case the loop has some positive cost
and actually reduce the cost.
So, shortest path never loops, so it will
never does not sent vertex twice, this means
that I at most have at most n minus 1 edges.
Because I can only allow, so I totally have
n vertices, so if I do not allow any vertex
to repeat anywhere along the way then; obviously,
I can only have n minus 1 vertices, n minus
1 edges. So, there is a bound on the length
of the shortest path, the other property is
that regardless of how the shortest path looks,
along the way every path that makes up the
shortest path is itself the shortest path.
So, for instance I have a path like this from
s to t which goes through some intermediate
vertices v 1, v 2 up to v m. Then, if I look
at the path only up to v m, then this is our
shortest path from s to v m. There cannot
be any shorter path, supposing there was another
shorted path. Suppose, the shorter way to
get from s to v m, then I can take this and
this and the red path now will be shorter
than the green path.
So, therefore, the fact that I am going to
t via v m and this is a shortest path means
that there must also we only this much of
our short path from s to v m and this whole
that we have point. So, again what happen
s to v 2 this must be the shortest path, because
otherwise if there were a shortest path then
I will take that shorter path and then I will
add on this path which I already have and
I will get a shortest path to everything from
v 3 onwards. So, every prefix of a shortest
path is itself a shortest path. So, these
two properties are enough for us to arrive
at the Bellman-Ford algorithm for shortest
path in the presence of negative edge weights.
So, to get to the Bellman-Ford algorithm we
have to analyze a little bit more about what
is happening in Dijsktra's algorithm. So,
in Dijsktra's algorithm whenever we burn a
vertices, whenever we visit it, we updates
all it is neighbors. So, we update the distance
of a when we burn a vertices j, we update
for every edge j k, we update the distance
to k to be what distance we already know for
k together with a distance to j an edge from
j to k.
So, we have a newly discovered distance through
j perhaps and we compare it to the distance
we already know and we keep the smaller of
the Dijsktra's algorithm. So, let us call
this operation an update, it updating k from
j. So, in Dijsktra's algorithm we only do
this update when we burn j and the correctness
of Dijsktra's algorithm says that when we
burnt j, the distance to j is the correct
distance to j.
So, what we have seen is that in negative
edge weight case, what if we uses the strategy
of Dijsktra's algorithm this may not be it,
if we will burn a vertices just because it
is shortest expected distance among the unburnt
vertices does not guarantee that this is correct
distances we might find later on a smaller
distance. But, in spite of this, this update
operation has some useful properties which
we can exploit.
So, the crucial thing is that we update gives
us some upper bound that the distance to k,
we already have... So, at any point the invariant
that we have is that the value that we have
as distances to k is greater than or equal
to the actual shortest distance from the source
to k, initially we may assume it is infinity.
So, that is surely greater than the actual
shorter distances. At any point when we reduce
it, we reduce it because we have found a concrete
path which gives us a shorter distance.
So, when we do this after this update we know
that the distance to k is no more than the
distance we have just discovered through j.
Because, if it was already less and we keep
it that way, because we found it through previous
j prime or we have found it now in which case
we have updated it on this update operation.
This also means because of our previous observation
about shortest paths that if actually on Dijsktra's
algorithm also, that if distance j is actually
correct and the shortest path now consists
of just adding this edge. We are not claiming
it is, if it is the shortest path, then the
distance to k will be correctly computed.
So, in a nutshell, this update operation is
a safe operation, because it will never bring
distance of k below the actual value. So,
it will always be adopt the value that we
want. So, we can keep doing spurious updates,
so unnecessary updates and it does not hurt
us. So, redundant updates cannot accept this
calculation, it just may not make progress,
but may not it will not send us to a situation
from which we cannot recover the minimum cost.
Because, we always be at or adopt the minimum
cost, so whenever we do a min, we will always
be coming down, but not processing below the
actual value we want to find.
So, if you look at Dijsktra's algorithm then
what it does is a particular sequence of greedy
updates, it chooses the smallest distance
vertex which is not burnt and it burns it
and the proof breaks down, because this sequence
does not match, necessarily give us a shortest
path, if the ways can be negative. So, a natural
question to ask is what sequence of updates
should I do in order to actually get the shortest
path? Is there a better way of computing the
sequence of updates, rather than going via
the greedy heuristics of Dijsktra's algorithm?
So, suppose we have two vertices s and t,
we want to find the shortest path from s to
t and suppose that is the shortest path which
goes via v 1 to v m we have seen before. Now,
if we do the updates in this order that is
we first compute the update from s to v 1
then we compute v 1 to v 2, then we compute
v 2 to v 3 in between we can do a other things,
it is only that these updates happen in this
sequence then v 3 to v 4 and so on and finally,
we do v m to t.
Then, what do you know where we knew earlier
that if you have correctly computed the distance
up to s, then this update will correctly compute
the distance of v 1, because this is the second
last node on this. So, if distance of j is
correct and j is a second last node of the
shortest path to k, distance of k is correct
after the update, so because distance of s
was 0 and it was correct, when we do update
s to v 1 this distance becomes correct.
Now, we might do also correct whether updates
will do not bother us, but now when we come
to v 2 we will be updating v 2 from v 1 and
v 1 is a second last path on this shortest
path. Therefore, this also becomes a correct
value, then this also become the correct value.
So, in the middle of all these updates if
we identify this particular sub sequence of
updates s to v 1 then v 1 to v 2 then v 2
to v 3 then we have got the distance. So,
now the question is how do we make sure that
we have this sequence of updates for s and
t.
So, Bellman-Ford algorithm basically says
do not try to find the particular sequence,
just generally compute all possible sequence
have updates. So, at a high level this is
the algorithm. It is says initially assigned
the distance of s to be 0 and the distance
of u to be infinity for every other vertex.
Now, we just blindly do every updates n minus
1 times, so what you do is initially you update
for every edge given the fact that s has distances
0 and u is infinity otherwise, then we update
everything.
So, all are these updates where s is the source
vertex and v is the target vertex, these will
give us now some finite values for these vs,
where as these will just remain infinity.
So, this will become finite and these will
become infinity, now you done one full sequence
of updates in which other then s all the neighbors
are wish now some finite values, now you do
this whole thing again.
So, you update every edge again and then you
update every edge again, now we know that
a shortest path between any two vertices as
at most n minus 1 edges. Therefore, if we
do this thing n minus 1 time, the claim is
that if I want any sequence of updates I might
find the sequence of updates should was like
this or a might find that any sequence of
n minus 1 updates which is a legal path will
be represented in this case.
So, this is a very clever matrix which has
all the updates after one iterations, all
the updates after two iterations or for want
a particular sequence toward update e 1, then
update e 2, then update then I will find it
e 1 here, then I will look for e 2 here, then
I will find e 3 here and then so on. So, every
possible path is represented in particular
given our example here by s goes from the
path goes from s to v 1, v 1 to v 2 and so
on.
Then, we find that the first updates comes
in iteration 1, then after have been updated
v 1 the next iteration v 1, v 2 is was a correct
distance to v 2, iteration 3 will give as
v 2 to v 3 and so on. And finally, iteration
n minus 1 actual it may not be n minus 1 is
depends on the length of this path. So, when
if this path actually as n minus 1 steps in
the last one will give us the update from
v m to t and the correct distance about t,
but this could actually will be even less
then n minus 1 it will path is of less lesser
length.
So, the algorithm is actually remarkably simple,
so you start from a source vertex s. So, initially
you assign the distance to be infinity for
every vertex and you initialize the distance
of s to be 0. Now, n minus 1 times you blindly
repeat the following operation for every edge
in your graph apply the distance updates.
So, you take the distance of the target of
that edge to be the minimum of the current
distance of that target or the distance to
the source of the edge plus the weight of
the edge.
So, you just blindly to this n minus 1 times
and it because of this property that you will
find for every valid shortest path, you will
find the sequence of updates which matches
that path in this sequence that you are to
computing here, you will always get the shortest
path to every other vertex starting from s.
So, let us look at an example and see how
the Bellman Ford algorithm actually works.
So, here is a graph it has some cycles and
it has an some negative weights, but there
are no negative cycles, for instance we will
see that here we have a cycles who weight
is minus 2 plus 1 is minus 1 plus 2 is plus
1. Similarly, here we have a cycle whose weight
is if you go around from 6 to 3 to 4 to 5
we have minus 2 plus 1 is minus 1 plus 3 is
plus 2 minus 1 is plus 1, so this is again
cycle or plus 1.
So, there are negative weights, but no negative
cycles and now in this we want to compute
shortest paths from 1 to every other vertices.
So, one is that source vertices, so we set
up this iterations, so in the initial step
we set the distance of vertix 1 to 0 and everything
else as infinity. Now, we will, in the first
step, try to update all neighbors of things
that were here, now all values which are infinity
do not update the neighbors, but the value
1 will it has 2 neighbors 2 and 8.
So, these two things now become finite values
10 and 8 respectively, now we have a these
three vertices which are finite values. So,
you would expect that the neighbors namely
7 and 2 has a neighbors 6. So, the only out
going is from 2 is 6 the only out going edge
from 8 to 7, so you would expect 7 and 6 to
get updated and indeed the next step you find
the 6 and 7 get values which are updated from
those values. So, 8 plus 1 is 9 ,10 plus 2
is 12.
Now, having got this you will find that we
have now updated 1, 2, 8, 7 and 6, now notice
that I now have another path not this path
from 1 to 2 will have a path which goes this
way from 1 to 2 via 7 and this becomes a smaller
path, because of this minus 4. So, in this
iteration I will actually find the first non-trivial
update which could not, which you violate
the Dijsktra's assumptions that all burnt
vertices or invariant.
So, the distances two which was already computed
to 10 will actually shift, in addition to
that of course, because we have new neighbors
of 6 was 6 will now give us a new value for
3 and so on. So, in this iteration I find
as I said, that the value of 2 reduces the
value of three becomes something finite. Notice
the value of 6 itself changes, why because
earlier we were looking at a path like this
and now we have discovered that this is actually
a better path like this, which has also a
negative edge to add to the benefit.
So, we come down from 12 to 8 plus 1 minus
is 8, so we continual like this at the next
step that path to 3 shrink further and that’s
because now having get a better path for 6.
So, in the previous path we said Oh, the path
for 6 plus 12 and 12 minus 2 was 10, now we
said, Oh, it is not 12 it is 8. So, 8 minus
2 is actually 6. So, you got a better path
to 3 we are discovered in new path, because
we had a path to 3 from 10 plus 1 is a 11
and so on.
So, we continue one more step and then because
now we know that 4 was reachable and 11 steps
4 plus 3 is 14. So, 5 is reachable, but 4
itself now because the value of 3 got updated.
So, in this iteration the value of 3 gets
updated from 11 to 7, this will get propagated
that after one more iteration. So, now this
value comes down from 14 to 7 plus 3, but
in this process what has happened is in the
value of 3 has itself gone down one more time.
So, its value again reduces the value of 4
and then finally, after the n minus 1 iteration
we get a stables set of values. So, this now
turn out to be the shortest paths to all the
vertices from this start vertex 1.
So, what is that complexity of this algorithm,
will where this outer loop, so we just run
this update n minus 1 times. So, it should
runs order n times and now an each loop we
basically blindly update every edge, so we
have an adjacency matrix, we have to identify
the edges the only based look at every entire
wherever we see an entry we take that j k
and we have been updated, but in an adjacency
list we have exactly the edges that we want.
So, we have 1, 2 up to n and we have exactly
the edges, so we can do this update and order
n time.
So, if we using adjacency matrix just identifying
which are the edges takes of the order n square
time. Because, we have to probe every entry
the adjacency matrix, adjacency list we can
do order m times. So, therefore if use an
adjacency matrix representation overall the
ford algorithm takes n cube time whereas,
in the adjacency list representation we can
reduce that to m n. And so of therefore, the
number of edges is small this is going to
be a much better solution than n cube.